## What's the difference between <<, <<< and < < in bash?

[full anmswer](https://askubuntu.com/questions/678915/whats-the-difference-between-and-in-bash/678919#678919)

- << is known as here-document structure. You let the program know what will be the ending text, and whenever that delimiter is seen, the program will read all the stuff you've given to the program as input and perform a task upon it.

- <<< is known as here-string . Instead of typing in text, you give a pre-made string of text to a program.

- Process Substitution

As tldp.org explains,

Process substitution feeds the output of a process (or processes) into the stdin of another process.

So in effect this is similar to piping stdout of one command to the other , e.g.

```
echo foobar barfoo | wc
```

But notice: in the bash manpage you will see that it is denoted as `<(list)`. So basically you can redirect output of multiple (!) commands.

> Note: technically when you say < < you aren't referring to one thing, but two redirections with single < and process redirection of output from <( . . .).

Now what happens if we do just process substitution?

$ echo <(echo bar)

```
/dev/fd/63
```

As you can see, the shell creates temporary file descriptor `/dev/fd/63` where the output goes (which according to Gilles's answer, is an anonymous pipe). That means < redirects that file descriptor as input into a command.

So very simple example would be to make process substitution of output from two echo commands into wc:

```
$ wc < <(echo bar;echo foo)
2 2 8
```

So here we make shell create a file descriptor for all the output that happens in the parenthesis and redirect that as input to wc .As expected, wc receives that stream from two echo commands, which by itself would output two lines, each having a word, and appropriately we have 2 words, 2 lines, and 6 characters plus two newlines counted.

How is process substitution implemented ? We can find out using the trace below (output shortened for brevity)

## [How can I make environment variables “exported” in a shell script stick around?](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/30189/how-can-i-make-environment-variables-exported-in-a-shell-script-stick-around)

在一个 shell script 中导出的变量如何持久化？ 比如说在 shell script 执行结束后仍然可以使用？

方法是**Source**你的脚本，通过下面的两种方式进行:

```
. ./script
```

```
source ./script
```

> the reason is that your script spawns a new shell process as a child of the current shell. Any environment changes you make in the child process cannot affect the parent. When you use . or source, you are not spawning a new child process, you are running the commands in the current shell

### 想要利用一个来自网络的脚本来给本地的计算机设置环境变量

```
source <(curl -s -L https://example.com/install.sh)

```

### 截取字符串

```
s='steve'
echo ${s:1}  //'teve'

```
### 获取数组的长度

```
echo ${#{ARRAY}[@]}
```

## 遍历数组
```
// declare an array variable
declare -a arr=("element1" "element2" "element3")

// now loop through the above array
for i in "${arr[@]}"
do
   echo "$i"
// or do whatever with individual element of the array
done

// You can access them using echo "${arr[0]}", "${arr[1]}" also
```

## 测试字符串是否以某个字符开始

```
# The == comparison operator behaves differently within a double-brackets
# test than within single brackets.

[[ $a == z* ]]   # True if $a starts with a "z" (wildcard matching).
[[ $a == "z*" ]] # True if $a is equal to z* (literal matching).
```

