When encoding binary data for IO in Go, there is a multitude of options available ranging from [gob](https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/gob/), [Protobuf](https://github.com/golang/protobuf), to roll-your-own encoder. This post examines Go’s *encoding/*[*Binary*](https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/binary/) package used to encode and decode numeric values into binary data that can be used for many purposes.

# A simple binary protocol

Imagine that you are writing Go code for small remote devices collecting sensor data to send to backend edge servers. To save bandwidth (and other  resources), you decide to create a simple binary format for your data as outline below:

```
0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7
0123456701234567012345670123456701234567012345670123456701234567
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
|    SensorID   |   LocationID  |            Timestamp         |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
|      Temp     |
+---------------+
```

The data is arranged in a fixed-size binary packet of 80 bits that divided into four fields including `SensorID` (16 bit), `LocationID` (16 bit), `Timestamp` (32 bit), and `Temperature` (16 bit).

The remainder of this post shows how to use the binary package in Go to  encode numeric values into this binary packet which can then be used in  IO operations.

> Source code for this post https://github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary

# Data representation concepts

Before discussing how to use Go to encode the numeric values into binary data, let us review two important concepts about binary data representation  using the `binary` package.

## Fixed-size values

The `binary` package supports several ways of encoding and decoding *fixed-size* numerical values. They are called *fixed* because the underlying binary representation always utilize a fix  number of bytes for a given type (i.e. 32 bits for all 32-bit size  values). Some functions in package `binary` can also encode and decode arrays, slices, and structs containing only fixed-size values.

> The binary package also supports variable-length encoding of numeric values where smaller values require fewer bytes. However, this is not covered  in this writeup.

## Byte order

Another concept worth discussing is the [*endianness*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endianness) of encoded data. This is the order in which the bytes, that represent a  numerical value, are arranged when the data is encoded. Go’s binary  package provides interface `binary.ByteOrder`:

```
type ByteOrder interface {
    Uint16([]byte) uint16
    Uint32([]byte) uint32
    Uint64([]byte) uint64
    PutUint16([]byte, uint16)
    PutUint32([]byte, uint32)
    PutUint64([]byte, uint64)
    String() string
}
```

This interface is implemented by types `binary.LittleEndian` and `binary.BigEndian`. These types can be used to automatically encode/decode values with the  proper endianness (byte order). A value should always be encoded and  decoded using with the same byte order or risk data corruption.

Next, let us see how to use these types to encode our binary packet.

# Encoding and decoding directly

Let us use the `BigEndian` type to encode a single packet of the sensor data. Because each field  in the packet is fixed-length, it is easy to explicitly construct the  packet by populating each field individually, as shown in the following  snippet, into a buffer (variable `buf`):

```
package mainimport (
    "encoding/binary"
...
)func main() {
    buf := make([]byte, 10)
    ts := uint32(time.Now().Unix())
    binary.BigEndian.PutUint16(buf[0:], 0xa20c) // sensorID
    binary.BigEndian.PutUint16(buf[2:], 0x04af) // locationID
    binary.BigEndian.PutUint32(buf[4:], ts)     // timestamp
    binary.BigEndian.PutUint16(buf[8:], 479)    // temp 
    fmt.Printf("% x\n", buf)
}
```

> Source code [github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/encode0.go](https://github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/blob/master/encode0.go)

Using methods from type `BigEndian` each field is encoded into slice `buf` at pre-determined indexes to fill up all 10 bytes (80 bits). Note that each `BigEndian` method call matches the size of its related field (i.e. `PutUint16` is used to encode the 16-bit for the sensorID and so on).

Conversely, when decoding the data, the same byte order must be used to avoid  improper reading of the encoded values. Assuming slice`buf` is available with the encoded binary data (either from in-memory or  received from a network IO), it can be decoded using the following  snippet :

```
func main() {
    buf := <contains encoded bytes>
    sensorID := binary.BigEndian.Uint16(buf[0:])
    locID := binary.BigEndian.Uint16(buf[2:])
    tstamp := binary.BigEndian.Uint32(buf[4:])
    temp := binary.BigEndian.Uint16(buf[8:])
    fmt.Printf("sid: %0#x, locID %0#x ts: %0#x, temp:%d\n", 
        sensorID, locID, tstamp, temp)
}
```

> Source code [github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/encode0.go](https://github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/blob/master/encode0.go)

Using methods from type `BigEndian`, each field is extracted from the slice containing the encoded data  packet. Again, since the sized of each encoded number is fixed, each  method call matches the expected data size as read from the index  offset.

# Encoding/decoding with an IO streams

Encoding and decoding data packets field by field, as shown above, can be error  prone for larger packets with many fields. Fortunately, the `binary` package supports Go’s streaming IO interfaces `io.Reader` and `io.Writer` when encoding and decoding data.

## Encoding with binary.Write

Function `binary.Write(w io.Writer, o ByteOrder, data interface{})` encodes parameter `data` with the provided `io.Writer` with the specified `ByteOrder`. Parameter `data` is provided as empty `interface{}` (instead of `[]bytes`). This is because the `Write` function can do some helpful magic to automatically encode the fixed-size values when they are passed in as:

- Numeric data types (i.e. bool, int8, uint8, int16, float32, etc.)
- Arrays, slices, or structs containing only fixed-size values
- Pointers to the types in the previous bullets

For instance, the following example introduces struct type `packet` to encapsulate the previously defined fields from the data packet.  Notice that the struct only contains numeric fields that appear in the  expected order. The code uses function `Write` to automatically encode values stored in `packet` value `dataIn`:

```
type packet struct {
    Sensid uint32
    Locid  uint16
    Tstamp uint32
    Temp   int16
}func main() {
    dataIn := packet{
        Sensid: 1, Locid: 1233, Tstamp: 123452123, Temp: 12,
    }
    buf := new(bytes.Buffer)    err := binary.Write(buf, binary.BigEndian, dataIn)
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println(err)
        return
    }
}
```

> Source code [github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/encode1.go](https://github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/blob/master/encode1.go)

In the previous snippet, after function `Write` is executed, writer `buf` will write the 10 bytes encoded using `BigEndian`. This time however, notice there is no explicit calls to any `ByteOrder` method`PutXXX` as before. Function `Write` handles the internal buffer bookkeeping and automatically figures out data sizes from the struct field types.

## Decoding with binary.Read

Conversely, function `binary.Read(r io.Reader, o ByteOrder, data interface{})` can read encoded data from an `io.Reader` and decode it automatically into parameter `data` which must be one of the followings:

- A pointer to a numeric value (i.e. bool, int8, uint8, int16, float32, etc.)
- A pointer to a struct or array of numeric values
- A slice of numbers or structs/arrays containing only numbers

For instance in the following code snippet, bytes from `io.Reader buf` are decoded with function `Read` and the decoded values are stored in the provided struct variable `dataOut`:

```
type packet struct {
    Sensid uint32
    Locid  uint16
    Tstamp uint32
    Temp   int16
}func main() {
    buf := <reader with encoded binary data>
    var dataOut packet    err := binary.Read(buf, binary.BigEndian, &dataOut)
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("failed to Read:", err)
        return 
    }
}
```

> Source code [github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/encode1.go](https://github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/blob/master/encode1.go)

When the previous code is executed, function `Read` uses `io.Reader buf` to read and decode binary values using the `BigEndian` byte order. Notice there is no explicit calls to `ByteOrder` methods `UintXXX` as before. Function `Read` automatically handles buffer bookkeeping and figures out the proper  data sizes to correctly decode the data into the respective fields of  variable `dataOut`.

## Encoding multiple packets

As mentioned above, functions `binary.Read` and `binary.Write` can also encode and decode data stored in arrays and slices. For  instance the following snippet encodes and end decodes multiple data  packets stored in a slice of `packet`:

```
type packet struct {
    Sensid uint32
    Locid  uint16
    Tstamp uint32
    Temp   int16
}func main() {
    dataOut := []packet{
        {Sensid: 1, Locid: 1233, Tstamp: 123452123, Temp: 12},
        {Sensid: 2, Locid: 4567, Tstamp: 133452124, Temp: 32},
        {Sensid: 7, Locid: 8910, Tstamp: 143452125, Temp: -12},
    }    // encode a slice of packet
    buf := new(bytes.Buffer)
    err := binary.Write(buf, binary.LittleEndian, dataOut)
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println(err)
        return
    }    // decode all items from slice
    dataIn := make([]packet, 3)
    err := binary.Read(buf, binary.LittleEndian, dataIn)
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("failed to Read:", err)
        return
    }    fmt.Printf("%v", dataIn)}
```

> Source code [github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/encode2.go](https://github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary/blob/master/encode2.go)

In the snippet above, slice `dataOut` is encoded using function `Write` and stored in byte buffer `buf`. The reverse is done with function `Read` which decode the data from `buf` and reconstructs the slice of `packet` which is assigned to variable `dataIn`.

# Conclusion

Package *encoding/binary* offers a convenient way of encoding data structures with numeric values into fixed-size binary representation. It can be used directly or as  the basis of custom binary protocols. Because the package supports IO  stream interfaces, it can be easily integrated in communication or  storage programs using streaming IO primitives.

More about the binary package:

- [Example source code for write up](https://github.com/vladimirvivien/go-binary)
- [The encoding/binary Go doc](https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/binary/)
- [Streaming IO in Go](https://medium.com/learning-the-go-programming-language/streaming-io-in-go-d93507931185)
- [Let’s Make an NTP Client in Go](https://medium.com/learning-the-go-programming-language/lets-make-an-ntp-client-in-go-287c4b9a969f)
- [Go Walkthrough: encoding/binary](https://medium.com/go-walkthrough/go-walkthrough-encoding-binary-96dc5d4abb5d)

