According to the [page 99 of "Understanding MySQL Internals" (ISBN 0-596-00957-7)](http://rads.stackoverflow.com/amzn/click/0596009577), here are paragraphs 1-3 explaining MySQL Packets:

> MySQL network communication code was written under the assumption that queries are always reasonably short, and therefore can be sent to and processed by the server in one chunk, which is called a *packet* in MySQL terminology. The server allocates the memory for a temporary buffer to store the packet, and it requests enough to fit it entirely. This architecture requires a precaution to avoid having the server run out of memory---a cap on the size of the packet, which this option accomplishes.
>
> The code of interest in relation to this option is found in **sql/net_serv.cc**. Take a look at **my_net_read()**, then follow the call to **my_real_read()** and pay particular attention to **net_realloc()**.
>
> This variable also limits the length of a result of many string functons. See **sql/field.cc** and **sql/intem_strfunc.cc** for details.

Knowing this about MySQL Packets allows a Developer/DBA to size them up to accommodate multiple BLOBs inside one packet even if they are obnoxiously large. Definitely, a packet too small will cause problems for open connections in this respect.

According to the [**MySQL Documentation**](http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.5/en/gone-away.html)

- You can also get these errors if you send a query to the server that is incorrect or too large. If mysqld receives a packet that is too large or out of order, it assumes that something has gone wrong with the client and closes the connection. If you need big queries (for example, if you are working with big BLOB columns), you can increase the query limit by setting the server's max_allowed_packet variable, which has a default value of 1MB. You may also need to increase the maximum packet size on the client end. More information on setting the packet size is given in [Section C.5.2.10, “Packet too large”.](http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.5/en/packet-too-large.html)
- An INSERT or REPLACE statement that inserts a great many rows can also cause these sorts of errors. Either one of these statements sends a single request to the server irrespective of the number of rows to be inserted; thus, you can often avoid the error by reducing the number of rows sent per INSERT or REPLACE.

**RECOMMENDATION**

Try raising the [**max_allowed_packet**](http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.5/en/server-system-variables.html#sysvar_max_allowed_packet) to a much larger number, since the default is 1M. I would suggest about 10 times the largest TEXT or BLOB field you have in your current dataset.

To set the max_allowed_packet to 256M, you can add it to /etc/my.cnf or my.ini

```sql
[mysqld]
max_allowed_packet=256M
```

to cover future restarts of mysqld. To install the value now on the server, please run this:

```sql
SET GLOBAL max_allowed_packet = 1024 * 1024 * 256;
```